EVALUACION 3D COVE HORIZON

[NOTE: Carta de evaluador pegada como texto en la sesión 2026-05-25 por Oscar.
No tenemos el PDF/docx original. Reconstruida desde el texto literal.
program_id = cove_horizon_2025 (placeholder)]

Criterion 1 - RELEVANCE
Score: 28.00 (Threshold: 18 / 35.00 , Weight: -)
The detailed criteria are set out in the call conditions (see Call document).
Link to policy:
The proposal outlines an effective approach to contribute to the goals of the Council Recommendations and to the Osnabrück Declaration. This will be achieved through the use of technologies, knowledge and education in VET to enhance employability, support social fairness and resilience, and foster the acquisition of entrepreneurial, digital and green skills.
EU Values:
The project's relevance to EU values is strongly confirmed through its ethics committee declaration for respecting privacy, gender equality, and offering equal opportunities and focus on disadvantaged groups.
Consistency:
The proposal largely addresses the Call objectives by e.g. the involvement of adequate stakeholders; an innovative approach based on the 3D printing technology to tackle societal challenges for the inclusion of disadvantaged groups; and a convincing description of its CoVEs outreach through a partnership gathering of suitable organisations. The goals are clearly defined and realistic. The needs analysis is appropriately supported by surveys and data, covers the regions and investigates aspects relevant to the project's goals. The findings suitably identify regions' common and specific challenges e.g. unemployment, social exclusion, education and training needs.
Activities:
The activities chosen from the three clusters are clearly identified and connected with the overall project objectives, with a good insight into their integration into the work plan. However, the activity of formulating 12 new projects has less relevance for the implementation of this proposal.
Innovation:
There is sufficient information on the state-of-the-art in the targeted countries pointing out existing shortages and confirming the introduction of 3D printing technologies in the Centres of Vocational Excellence (CoVEs) as a credible innovation, generating a good impact on social inclusion, skills and entrepreneurship.
Regional dimension:
The contribution to local and regional development is sufficiently demonstrated for each of the participating countries (Spain, Portugal, Greece and Italy). Smart specialisation is not mentioned as such, but the work plan proposes relevant endeavours, such as investing in 3D printing using European Regional Development Fund, and further contributions to related existing regional strategies.
Cooperation and partnerships:
The partnership composition is relevant and enhances the partners' expertise, transnationality and resources in a convincing way to address the identified challenges. The arrangements positively foster mutual benefit from cooperation of VETs, SMEs contributing to 3D printing technologies sharing, and NGOs contributing to outreach.
EU added value:
Complementarity is well demonstrated by activities carried out in both ongoing and completed projects, that enhance the added value on partners, individual and institutional levels on which the project will build. Furthermore, the application shows the necessity to pursue EU cooperation to achieve the expected results.
Internationalisation:
The international dimension of VET excellence is well demonstrated through the envisaged international strategy and activities that foster internship training courses, competitions, the enhanced mobility of learners and staff, and sustainable partnerships.
Digital skills:
Digital skills are deeply rooted in the project to develop 3D printing as an interdisciplinary, useful and necessary learning tool.
Green skills:
Although the project recognises the importance of green skills, the topic is poorly developed and not sufficiently addressed in the tasks.
Social dimension:
The social dimension is strongly addressed in the project adoption of 3D Printing to increase inclusion of vulnerable people and promotion of shared values, social cohesion, and gender equality.

Criterion 2.1 - QUALITY — PROJECT DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
Score: 17.00 (Threshold: 13 / 25.00 , Weight: -)
The detailed criteria are set out in the call conditions (see Call document).
Coherence:
The project's design is appropriate and ensures clear consistency between its objectives, activities, and budget and aligns well with its main goals. It presents a suitably planned set of activities to address identified needs and achieve the expected results.
Activities:
The proposal is sufficiently informative on the work to be carried under each of the three clusters' fifteen selected activities. Relevant insights are given on the tasks' scope and specific objectives, links to the work plan, as well as expected results and outcomes.
Methodology:
The methodology is appropriately based on a stepped approach for implementing the project leading to the production of the expected results. It is illustrated in a relevant graph that presents a number of expected achievements confirming the methodology's feasibility and potential to produce the planned results. However, some parts of the methodology lack sufficient detail.
Management:
The lead partner's experience as a coordinator in projects under ERASMUS+ is well evidenced. The process-based arrangements are good, cover all aspects for successful management, and use efficient time management, tasks sequencing, reporting and communication tools. A coordinators' team role to interact with the project's partners and the transnational network is well thought out with clearly defined responsibilities. The project's implementation and KPIs are appropriate in terms of timelines and objectives. The total resources allocated to the project are coherent at the project's level.
Budget:
The project's total budget is appropriate for the planned activities. It is neither overestimated nor underestimated. The financial and cost control mechanisms are sound and call upon clear processes and reporting tools. The project's cost-effectiveness is sufficiently presented. However, the resources allocated at the level of the work packages using the same unit cost for all the partners and the per month effort even distribution raise concerns, as they are not well explained and justified.
Work plan:
The work packages and task descriptions are sufficiently detailed and highlight well the specific objectives and activities. A relevant graph focuses on events' features, which is helpful. The activities related to preparation, implementation, exploitation, evaluation and dissemination are adequately addressed. The milestones explain related outputs and how they are reached convincingly. However, the work plan structure lacks a global view showing the work-packages interaction to justify their sequencing. Curriculum content is not adequately presented, and documents such as management, quality and dissemination plans are not among the deliverables. This is a shortcoming.
Quality control:
Quality control (QC) activities are of good quality, adequate and sufficiently detailed. They include continuous evaluation, and mid-term and end of the project internal and external quality assessments. The setting of Guidance Services and Evaluation of Knowledge groups are positive measures for implementing continuous expert reviews and evaluations. The presented quality indicators are convincing. Although ISO standards and a QC manual are positive practices, peer reviews and benchmarking are not addressed, and the QC manual is not part of the deliverables. The project's risks are identified and explained and mitigating actions are adequately addressed.
Mobility activities:
A set of national and international mobility activities are appropriately linked to the project's goals and clearly described in the tasks. The number of participants and courses are appropriate. European transparency and recognition tools are sufficiently addressed for e.g. courses achievement and Europass Mobility Certificates. The practical arrangements are of good quality and include e.g.: preparatory activities, safety and protection, and health insurance.

Criterion 2.2 - QUALITY — PARTNERSHIP AND COOPERATION ARRANGEMENTS
Score: 18.00 (Threshold: 11 / 20.00 , Weight: -)
The detailed criteria are set out in the call conditions (see Call document).
Configuration:
The project's partnership appropriately involves an optimised mix of partners. Their profiles sufficiently demonstrate their complementarity and coherence with the project's overall activities and goals and their added value to successfully deliver all aspects of the project. Participation in the work packages is clearly indicated. The application puts forward positive aspects such as:
a) VET institutions relevant expertise in local practices for people with fewer opportunities, in vocational training for secondary school and in regional-certified VET;
b) SMEs knowledge in the 3D printing in particular for digital technologies and relationship with large business group operating in ICT;
c) NGOs for their capacities in managing diverse courses for young people, and contribute to the coordination needed in guidance services and to raising VET attractiveness, as well as developing the Intellectual Outputs (IOs).
Upward convergence:
The presented consortium selection rationale is convincing and appropriately considers upward convergence intentions resulting in a consortium partnership composed of VETs/universities, SMEs, NGOs public entities, and chambers of commerce. The variety of profiles in the consortium is a convincing positive factor supporting potential upward convergence. The ability of the partners to share creative approaches and best practices as well as the relevant actions to transfer knowledge among them are adequately highlighted and appropriately support upward convergence.
Geographical dimension:
The consortium geographical dimension is well explained and justified, and shows a balanced representation in 12 innovation hubs in four partner countries, which is strongly motivated through the per country needs analysis and a presentation of various rationales for the consortium composition. It has a relevant regional dimension coverage through the VET institutions, SMEs and NGOs/ associations involving a significant number of stakeholders and actors at the local and regional levels.
Collaboration:
The management arrangements for the partners collaboration are clearly presented, with sufficient details on administrative, monitoring and coordinating tasks for both internal and external purposes. They ensure good communication among the project's partners, as well as with the external stakeholders. Related approaches are well detailed and include appropriate tools, reporting, and potential conflict handling mechanisms. While the application notes that decisions will be taken through voting, related rules are only sketched through a brief mention of a democracy governance and ethical committee. The number and timing of the meetings are sufficient. However, they are not adequately reported in the Project's Gantt/timeline.

Criterion 3 - IMPACT
Score: 16.00 (Threshold: 11 / 20.00 , Weight: -)
The detailed criteria are set out in the call conditions (see Call document).
Exploitation:
The project's exploitation of results is based on a set of activities to raise VET attractiveness, that positively envisage the organisation of multiplier events, internal workshops and consultation periods with partners and stakeholders from VETs/SMEs/NGOs at the local, regional or national level. They are sufficiently detailed and include access to the project's training materials and knowledge, installation of equipment for labs, organization and management of contests and good practices. The exploitation of the results after the project's end is shortly but sufficiently described within the project's foreseen sustainability activities, and linked to appropriate indicators. The project clearly indicates that its results, including the Intellectual Outputs (IOs), will be made available on the project's platform, and by other means such as websites, social media, Erasmus+ platforms and offered to other target groups and stakeholders interested in them, which is positive.
Dissemination:
Dissemination and communication descriptions are well addressed, with relevant information on the approach and activities undertaken during and after the project's end. The target groups are comprehensively covered. The dissemination plan outlines relevant activities and appropriate tools and channels to reach the stakeholders, in particular policy makers. It relevantly highlights the role and active involvement of all consortium partners, calls upon their resources, and staff and uses their own communication tools to reach a wider audience. The dissemination of experiences and success stories and the setting of competitions and awards are positive aspects.
Impact:
Overall, the expected impact is well structured around the project's general objective. The proposal covers impact during and after the project ends. The impacts on local, national and international levels are appropriately justified and cover topics such as specific skills development, supporting policies for the inclusion of vulnerable groups, learning sustainability and growth. Extensive details are given on potential impacts on the consortium partners as well as on external stakeholders (including e.g. learners with fewer opportunities, trainees, and students). The presented indicators to monitor progress and assess the expected impact are well-defined and appropriate. The attention given to knowledge transfer, and the intention to develop an impact plan, including further impact analyses and indicators are clear proposal assets.
Sustainability:
The sustainability governance provisions are good and present concrete measures to ensure the project's sustainability. They sufficiently describe relevant arrangements to continue the support to the created networks and Innovation hubs (CoVEs). The foreseen exploitation of results developed during and after the project lifetime, and extending the partnership for a period of 4 years after it ends, are positively supporting the project's sustainability measures. Although further meetings/events with the stakeholders are an adequate sustainability activity, a strategy and plan to ensure their coherence is not well evidenced, which is a shortcoming.
